The Samsung Galaxy S7 is a stellar phone. It's a handset that packs great battery smarts, excellent camera abilities and loads of raw power into an increasingly affordable package.
Even though Samsung has replaced the Galaxy S7 with the new Galaxy S8, it's still worth taking a look at the 2016 flagship Samsung phone for your next big purchase. The price has begun to drop quite impressively, and the Galaxy S8 lacks a killer feature that makes it a must-have over the Galaxy S7. 

The design is similar to 2015's Galaxy S6 - meaning some have said the Galaxy S7 should be called the Galaxy S6S - but this in-depth review shows there's a lot more going on under the hood to supplement the improved design.
If you're looking for the curved phone variant of this design, the Galaxy S7 isn't competing as closely with the Galaxy S7 Edge as the S6 did with the S6 Edge, with the curved display variant getting a bump in screen size this time round, taking it more into phablet territory.
Update: Good news for those who have hung onto their trusty Samsung Galaxy S7: Android Oreo is coming...at some point. Samsung is currently trailing the beta software for the Samsung Galaxy S8, but it should make its way in the coming months. 
Better yet, you can get one of these still-awesome phones for lower than ever with our curated selection of the best Samsung Galaxy S7 deals. But since we love you, you might want to know about this little phone coming soon in 2018 called the Samsung Galaxy S9.
Samsung Galaxy S7 price and release date
		Released in March 2016
		Launch price £569 (around $750 / AU$900)
		Now down to around $440/£420/AU$700
IS THE SAMSUNG GALAXY S8 FOR YOU?

Samsung's latest flagship phone is the Galaxy S8 and you may want to buy it instead of the Galaxy S7.
The Galaxy S8 features an even more powerful chipset, a new screen that means almost the whole front of the phone is a display and there's a new assistant technology called Bixby.
If you want the best phone in the world right now, check out the Samsung Galaxy S8 review. If you want a great phone for a bit less money, keep reading our Galaxy S7 review.
In the UK, you're looking at a hugely impressive £399 SIM-free cost, while those in the US will have to part with $199 upfront as part of a two-year contract, or fork over as low as $440 for the unlocked Samsung Galaxy S7. In Australia the SIM-free price was set at AU$1149 but you can now get it for around AU$700.
The price has dropped significantly after the Samsung Galaxy S8 launch making this a great price for a five star phone - see how much you'll need to spend on your contract at our best Galaxy S7 deals page, and expect the price to fall even lower following the announcement of the Samsung Galaxy S9.
Even though there's a newer Samsung Galaxy S8, it's hard not to like the Galaxy S7. It takes the much-improved, premium design from the Galaxy S6 and reinstates a few features from the Galaxy S5 that were shockingly missing from its successor.
The package is an enticing one, but 2016 was a tough year for flagship phones, so Samsung needed something big to stay ahead. The LG G5 launched with a unique modular pull but failed, the HTC 10 looked to rekindle some of the Taiwanese firm's former glories (with mixed success) and, of course, the iPhone 7 landed with no headphone jack and waterproofing to match the Galaxy S7's similar ability.
Samsung may have been first out of the flagship blocks, but it needed to make the most of its strong start to stay ahead of the pack.
 Be sure to watch our video review of the Samsung Galaxy S7 Design
		Design is similar to previous iteration, but still strong
		Rear curving makes it much nicer to hold in the hand
		Now waterproof, which adds a level of security to use
		Can be gripped securely thanks to smaller bezels
		Muffled single speaker
SAMSUNG GALAXY S7 SPECS

Weight:  152g
Dimensions:   142.4 x 69.6 x 7.9 mm
OS:  Launched with Android 6, upgradeable Android 7 and soon, 8
Screen size:  5.1-inch
Resolution:  1440x2560
CPU:  Snapdragon 820/Exynos 8890
RAM:  4GB
Storage:  32GB (with microSD)
Battery:  3000mAh
Rear camera:  12MP
Front camera: 5MP 
At first glance you'd be forgiven for thinking the Samsung Galaxy S7 looks almost identical to the Galaxy S6. And that's because it is.
Samsung has reused the premium glass and metal finished it employed on the S6, which finally saw the manufacturer move away from its reliance on plastic to materials which better reflected the flagship price tag it was slapping on its top phones.
On closer inspection though, you'll begin to notice the subtle differences that make the Samsung Galaxy S7 the best looking, and feeling, Galaxy ever.
Samsung has dropped the metallic rim around its iconic physical home key, enabling it to blend a little more seamlessly into the overall aesthetic of the S7, almost masking its existence.

I'm a fan. It makes for a cleaner look, and that look is further improved with the color-coded earpiece grille, which was also metallic on the S6.
The corners are more rounded, and the aluminum frame that's sandwiched between the front and rear glass is less obtrusive, with less of an overhang than its predecessor. That means there is less metal against your skin, which initially makes the S7 feel a little less premium than the S6, but once you've got used to it you'll find it's still a stylish presence in the hand.
While the Galaxy S7 sports the same size 5.1-inch display as the S6, Samsung has managed to shave off a fraction of the bezel around the screen, reducing the handset's height and width slightly.

That gives you dimensions of 142.4 x 69.6 x 7.9mm – and it's that last number which is the most interesting. At 7.9mm thick the Galaxy S7 is fatter than the S6 by 1.1mm, but holding it in your hand you won't know.
That's because of the gently sloping edges on the rear of the handset. The finish, which is mirrored on the rear of the Galaxy S7 Edge, is borrowed from the Galaxy Note 5, and enables the phones to sit more snugly in the palm for a firmer, more comfortable hold.
The Galaxy S7 is a phone you can grip confidently – unlike the iPhone 6S and LG G5, with their flat backs resulting in a slightly awkward position in the hand. The metal and glass doesn't offer much in the way of grip, but because the phone is better positioned in the hand I felt like I was less likely to let it slip compared with the iPhone or S6.

